Transaction:
    A transaction is an exectuing program that forms a logical unit of database processing. 
    A transaction includes one or more database access operations-these can include 
    insertion, deletion modification or retreival operations.
    If the transactions dont update the database but only retrieve the data are called read-only
    transactions.
    the basic database access operations that a transactions can include are :
    i. read_item(X): Reads a database item named X.
    ii. write_item(X): Writes the value program to the database item.
    
    The read-set of the transaction is the set of all database items that the transaction reads.
    The write-set of the transaction is the set of all database items that the transaction writes.
    
Desirable Properties of a Transaction:
    1. Atomicity:
        The transaction is an atomic unit of work. It is either performed entirely or not at all
        transaction manager responsible for atomicity of transactions
    2. Consistency:
        The complete execution of the transaction must take the database from one consistent state to another.
        Application programmer is responsible is responsible for preserving the consistency of the database.
    3. Isolation:
        The transaction must be executed in isolation from other transactions. There should not be interference of other transactions.
        Concurrency control manager is responsible
    4. Durabilty:
        The changes made by the transaction must be saved permanently after the transaction has committed.
        Recovery manager is responsible


Transaction and System Concepts:

    Transaction States and Additional Operators:
        - BEGIN_TRANSACTION: this marks the start of the transcation
        - READ/WRITE: These specify the read and write operations on the database 
            items that are executed as a part of the transaction
        - END_TRANSACTION: This specifies that all the READ and WRITE operations 
            are completed and at this point a check is done to see if the changes 
            made by the transaction can be saved permanently to the database or 
            the transaction should be aborted.
        - COMMIT_TRANSACTION: This marks the successful end of the transaction 
            so that any changes made to the database will be 
            permanently saved to the database and will not be undone.
        - ABORT_TRANSACTION: This signals that the transaction has ended unsuccessfully 
            and that the changes made by the transcation needs to be undone.

    Transaction State Diagram:
        - The transaction enters the active state as soon as it starts its execution. 
        Here it issues the read and write operations on the database. 
        - When the transaction ends the transactions enters the partially completed state. 
        At this point some recovery protocols need to ensure that the system failure 
        wont lead to the inability to permanently save the changes of the transaction. 
        - if the checks are successful the transaction moves to the commited state 
        and the changes are permanently stored in the database. 
        - if any of the checks fails then the transaction is aborted and all the changes 
        made by the transaction needs to be rolledback. 
        - The terminated state corresponds to the transaction leaving the system. 
        The info of the transaction stored in the system table is removed.

    System Log:
        To be able to recover from failure a log is maintained to keep track 
        of all the transaction operations. The log is kept on a disk to prevent 
        any failure except disk failure and catastrophic failure to affect it. 
        The logs are periodically backed up in archival storage to guard aginst such catastrophic failures.
        Log Records:
            1. [start_transaction, T]: Indicates that the transaction has started execution.
            2. [write, T, X, old, new]: Indicates that the transaction has changed the value of the databse item X from the old value 'old' ot the new value 'new'.
            3. [read, T, X]: Indicates the the transaction has read the value of the database item X
            4. [commit, T]: Indicates that the transaction has reached its commit point and that the changes will be saved permanently.
            5. [abort, T]: Indicates the transaction has been aborted.


Why Concurency Control is needed?
    
    The Lost Update Problem (Write-Write Conflict):
        This problems occurs when the two transactions that access the same 
        database items are interleaved in such a manner that the final value 
        of the item is incorrect. 
        Simply happens when both the transaction reads the same value of the item; 
        then the transactions will update their own new value.and then when they 
        update the the final value wont be the cumulative value. 
        but the value of the last committing transaction.
    
    The Temporary Update Problem/Dirty Read (Write-Read Conflict):
        This happens when the first transaction updates the database then it 
        fails and aborts. But before it aborts some other transaction reads the 
        value updated by the transcation. Hence, the data that the second 
        transaction is called the dirty data, So, the Dirty Read Problem.
    
    Incorrect Summary Problem:
        IF one transaction is calculating the aggregate function while other 
        transaction is updating some values then, the earlier transaction may 
        read some values before they were updated and some after they were updated.

    Unrepeatable read problem:
        Another problem that may occur is called unrepeatable read, 
        where a transaction T reads the same item twice and the item is
        changed by another transaction T′ between the two reads.

    Phantom tuples:
        refer navathe

Why Recovery Is Needed?
    Whenever a tranation is submitted the database system must ensure that either
    1. The transaction is cumpletely executed and that its effects are permenently stored.
    2. The transaction has no effect whatsoever on the database.
    
    Types of Failure:
    1. Computer Failure.
    2. A Transaction or system error
    3. Local errrs or exceptions conditions 
    4. Concurrency Control enforcements
    5. Disk Failure
    6. Physical problems and catastrophes


Schedules (Histories) of Transactions:
    A schedule(history) of n transactions is an ordering of the operations of 
    the transactions subject to the constraint that the operations of the 
    transactions tht participate in S must be in the same order as they appear 
    in the transaction. However the operations of some other transaction may be interleaved.

Types of Schedules:
    1. Serial Schedule: 
    A schedule is said to be serial if the transactions are 
    executed one after another consecutively without interleaving. 
    The problem with the serial schedules is that they limit concurrency. 
    Hence, the serial schedules are considered not practical.

    2. Complete Schedule:
    A schedule S of n transactions is said to be a complete schedule if
    the operations in S are exactly those operations in the 
    transactions including the commit or abort operation as the last 
    operation for each transaction in the schedule.

    3. Recoverable Shedule:
        We would like to ensure that a transaction onve committed should never be rolled back. this ensures the durablity of transactions. The schedules that theoretically meet this criteria are called recoverable schedules.
        The condition for recoverable schedules is that
        no transaction T in S commits until all transactions T' that have written some data item that T has read have committed.

    4. Strict Schedule:
        A more restrictive type of schedule called a strict schedule is a schedule in which transactions can neither read or write an item X until a transaction that previously wrote the item X has committed.


Characterizing the schedules based on Serializibility:

    Serializable Schedules: 
        A schedule S of n transcation is serializable if it is equivalent to 
        some serial schedule of the same n transactions. Saying that the non 
        serial schedule is equivalent to some serial schedule which is considered correct.
    
    Result Equivalence:
        Two schedules are said to be result equivalent if they produce the 
        same final state of the database. However, two schedules may produce 
        the same result by accident. Hence, result equivalence alone cannot be 
        used to define equivalence of the schedules

    Conflict Equivalence:
        Conflicting Operations:
            Two operations of the schedule are said to be conflicting if they 
            satisfy these three conditions:
                1. The operations belong to different transactions.
                2. They access the same data item
                3. One of them is write operation
        
        Two schedules are said to be conflict equivalent if the order of the 
        conflicting operations is same in both the schedules.
        Hence, a schedule is said to be conflict serializable if it is 
        conflict equivalent to some serial schedule S'.
        
        Testing for Conflict serializibility: 
            The following Algorithm can be used to test the conflict 
            serializaibility of the schedule
            The algorithm uses the read and write operations to form a 
            directed graph of n verices and edges. The graph has a vertex 
            for each transaction in the schedule. 
            and there is an edge from transaction Ti to another transaction Tj if: 
                1. Tj executes a read_item after Ti executes a write_item on X
                2. Tj executes a write_item after Ti executes a read_item on X
                3. Tj executes a write_item after Ti executes a write_item on X
            
            The schedule S is serializable iff there is no cycle in the graph.
            and the serial order is give by the topologial ordering of the nodes
            i.e the transactions.

        NOTE: Once the transaction commits then we wont conisder its operations for further
            discussion of conflicting operations

    
    View Equivalence:
        The schedules are said to be view equivalent of they satisfy the 
        following three conditions:
            1. Same set of transactions participate in both the schedules.
            2. If in the first schedule Ti performs read(X) after Tj 
                performs write(X) then same should happen in the second schedule.
            3. If Ti operation does the final write(X) in the first schedule 
                then the same should happen in the second schedule.
        
        The idea behind the view equivalence is that each read_operation reads 
        the result of the same write operation. hence is said to see the same view. 
        Condition 3 ensures that the at the end of schedules both the database have the same state. 
        A schedule is said to be view serializable if it is view equivalent to some serial schedule.



Lock: 
    A lock is a variable associated with each data items that specifies the 
    status of the item with respect to the possible operations that can be applied to it.

Types of Locks:

    1. Binary Locks:
        A binary lock has two value LOCKED and UNLOCKED (1 and 0 for simplicity). 
        Each data item is associated with a lock variable. 
        If the value of the lock is 1 then the item cannot be accessed for any operation. 
        If the value of the lock is 0 then the item can be accessed when requested. 
        We refer to the locked state of the database item X as LOCK(X).
        We have two operations associated with binary locks:
            1. lock_item(X): Whenever the transaction requires the data item X. 
                It issues a lock_item(X). If the item is already locked then 
                the transaction is forced to wait. 
                Else the LOCK(X) is set to 1 and the transaction can access 
                the data item for its operations.
        
                 lock_item(X)
                     if(LOCK(X) == 0)
                         LOCK(X) = 1;
                     else:
                         wait while(LOCK(X) != 0) goto B
        
            2. unlock_item(X): Once all the read and write operations of the 
            transactions are done the transaction unlcks the data item by 
            issuing unlock_item() on X. This sets the LOCK(X) to 0.
            
                unlock_item(X)
                    LOCK(X) = 0;
                    wake one of the waiting transactions
            
            Note that the operations lock and unlock items must be implemented 
            as indivisible units. i.e no interleaving is allowed.
        
        If binary locking scheme is to be used then the transactions need to follow these rules:
            1. The transaction will issue the lock_item before executing read and write operations.
            2. The transaction will issue the unlock_item after completing all the read and write operations.
            3. The transaction cant lock the item for which it already has a lock
            4. The transaction cant unlock an item unless they have locked the item.
        
    2. Shared/Exclusive Locks (Read/Write locks):
        The preceeding binary lock scheme is too restrictive for database items 
        because at most only one transaction can access a data item. 
        But we should allow multiple transactions to access the database item 
        if they are accesssing the data item for reading purpose only.
        For this purpose a different type of locking is used. 
        The new scheme has three states for the lock. 
            1. read-locked: 
                The read-lock is also called the shared-lock as multiple transactions 
                can access the data item for reading purpose.
            
                 read_lock(X):
                     if LOCK(X) = unlocked:
                         then LOCK(X) = read_locked
                         #reads = 1
                     elif LOCK(X) = read_lock:
                         then #reads += 1
                     else:
                         wait while(LOCK(X) == unlocked)
                         goto start
            
            2. write-locked: 
                Also called as exclusive lock as only one transaction should 
                have access to the item for writing purpose.
            
                 write_lock(X):
                     if LOCK(X) = unlock:
                         LOCK(X) = write_locked
                     else:
                         wait while (LOCK(X) = unlocked)
                         goto start
            
            3. unlocked: The data item is unlocked and can be accessed as requested.
            
                unlock(X):
                    if LOCK(X) == write_locked:
                        LOCK(X) = unlocked
                    else:
                        #reads  -= 1
                        if #reads == 0:
                            LOCK(X) = unlocked
                        
            
        
        When using shared/exclusive locks we enforce the following rulse:
            1. A transaction T must issue read_lock or write_lock before any read operation.
            2. A transaction must issue a write lock before any write operation.
            3. the ransaction must issue unlock item after all the read and write operations.
            4. A transaction will not issue a read lock if it already has read / write lock.
            5. A transaction will not issue a write lock if it already has a read/write lock.
            6. A transaction will not issue unlock item unless it has a read/write lock.
        
        
        Conversion of Locks:
            Pata hai 
    
    Using binary locks or shared/exclusive locks alone wont guarantee serializibility. 
    To guarantee serializibilty we must follow an additional protocol corncerning 
    the position of the locking and unocking.
    
Two Phase Locking Protocol:
    A transaction is said to follow a two phase protocol if all the locking 
    operations preceed the first unlock operation. 
    Such a transaction can be divided into two phase. 
    The first phase  called the expanding phase where the transaction acquires 
    all the locks. 
    And the shrinking phase where the transaction after completing all the operations 
    releases its locks. If the conversion of locks is allowed then the upgrading 
    of locks must appear in the expanding phase an the downgrading must 
    be done in the shrinking phase of the transaction.
    
    Basic 2PL: 
        The technique just described is the basic 2PL scheme. So the transaction 
        is divided into two phases, the expanding and shrinking phase.

        NOTE:
            The last lock operation of the transaction is called the lock point and determines the serial order of the transactions

            Although 2PL GUARANTEES SERIALIZIBILITY
            But there is still possibilities of DEADLOCKS and CASCADING ROLLBACKS 
    
    Conservative 2PL:
        DisSatisfying Hold and Wait to prevent deadlocks

        The protocol is a dead-lock free protocol. However it is difficult in practice 
        because of need to predefine the read and write set.
    
        Just like the Basic 2PLn the conservative 2PL also requires the transaction 
        to lock all the data items that it uses. While doing this if there is any 
        data item for which the transaction cant obtain the lock then, 
        it will not lock any items at all instead it waits untill all the data 
        items are unlocked.

        
    Strict 2PL:
        The most popular variation of the 2PL is the strict 2PL, which guarantees 
        strict schedule. In this variation, a transaction T DOES NOT REALEASE ITS EXCLUSIVE LOCKS UNTIL IT COMMITS OR ABORTS. 
        Hence no other transaction can read the changes made by the transaction 
        unless it commits, leading to a strict schedule for recoverability.
    
    Rigorous 2PL:
        Does not release any of its locks (both shared and exclusive) until 
        after it commits or is aborted.

Graph based Protocols:
    Orders the dataitems in a DAG thus dissatisfying CircularWait and preventing Deadlocks
    However some modifications are needed for CASCADELESS and RECOVERABILITY 

    Rules for locking an item by a transaction:
        1. First lock by the transaction can be done on any unlocked data item
        2. Subsequently, a data item can be locked by the transaction iff it holds the lock on its parent
        3. A data item can be unlocked at any time, thus improving the concurrency
        4. A dataitem once locked and unlocked cannot be locked again by the same transaction

    If there is a set of item we want to lock then we start by locking the LCA of the set of dataitems in the Tree and then progress down out desired list of items


TimeStamp Based Protocols:
    -- A different approach to concurreny control involves using transaction timestamps
        to order transactions execution for an equivalent serial schedule.
    -- A timestamp is an unique identifier created by DBMS to identify a transaction.
    -- timestamp values are assigned in the order in which the transactions are submitted
        to the system, so a timestamp can be thought of as the transactions start time.
    -- Concurrency control techniques based on timestamp ordering do not use locks
        and hence deadlocks cannot occur.

TimeStamp Ordering Protocol:
    -- The idea for this scheme is to enforce the equivalent order on the transaction
        based on their timestamps.
    -- A schedule is then serializable and the only equivalent schedule permitted 
        has the transactions in order of their timestamp values. This is called
        timestamp ordering.
    -- The algorith allows interleaving of transaction operations but it must ensure that
        for each conflicting operations the order in which the items are accessed must
        follow the timestamp order.
    -- Each database item is associated with two timestamps:
        1. read_ts(x) the read timestamp of the item x is the timestamp of the youngest 
            transaction that has performed the read operation on the dataitem.
        2. write_ts(x) the write timestamp of the item x is the timestamp of the youngest 
            transaction that has performed the write operation on the dataitem.
    -- Whenever a transaction T issues a write(x) a check is done to see 
        if any younger transaction has performed a read or write operation on the data item 
            i.e if write_ts(x) > ts(T) or read_ts(x) > ts(T)
        if the condition is true then the transaction is rejected 
        else write operation is performed and the write_ts(x) is updated to the ts(T)
    -- Whenever a transaction T issues a read(x) a check is done to see 
        if any younger transaction has done the write operation on the data item
            i.e. if write_ts(x) > ts(T)
        if the condition is true then the transaction is rejected
        else read operation is performed and the read_ts(x) = max(read_ts(x), ts(T))
    -- The schedules by basic TO are guaranteed conflict serializable and deadlock free.
        However cyclic restart may occur if a transaction is continually aborted.

Strict TO:
    -- A variation of TO that gurantees conflict serializibility and ensures strict (cascadeless)
        schedules.
    -- If a younger transaction has to perform a read or write operation on a data item X then
        it has its operations delayed until the last transaction that has written the data item
        is either committed or aborted.

Thomas Write Rule:
    -- If the transaction issues write(X) then
        1. If read_ts(X) > ts(T) then the transaction is aborted
        2. If write_ts(X) > ts(T) then the write operations is not performed 
            and the transaction execution is continued
        3. else the write operation is performed and the write_ts(X) is updated to ts(X)

Deadlocks and Starvation:
    -- Deadlock occurs when each transaction in a set of transaction is waiting on 
    some data item that is already locked by some other transaction. 
    -- So each transaction is in the waiting queue of some data item.
    -- There are protoclos defined that make a decision about what to do with a 
    transaction that is possibly involved in a deadlock. 
    -- These protocols use timestamp which is a unique identifier assigned to each transaction. 
    Suppose a transaction Ti wants a data item which is already locked by some other transaction Tj then:
    1. Wait-die: 
        If TS(Ti) < TS(Tj) (Ti older than Tj) 
            then Ti is allowed to wait
       else: abort Ti and restart it by assigning the same time stamp

       In simple words. If the lock is held by a younger transaction and the old wants it then it will wait
   
    2. Wound-wait:
       If TS(Ti) < TS(Tj) (Ti older than Tj)
           then abort Tj and restart it with the same time stamp
       else:
           Allow Ti to wait
       
       In simple words. If the lock is held by a younger transaction and the 
       old wants it then it will abort the younger transaction and take the lock. (SAVAGE)


   Deadlock detection and timeouts:
       A second more practical way to deal with deadlock is deadlock detecion. 
       This is more appropriate to use when we know there will be no interference 
       between the transaction i.e. they wil rarely access the same data item, 
       and the transaction wont be long. 
   
       A simple way to detect the detecta state of dead-lock is to create a 
       wait-for graph. 
       A node is created for each of the executing transaction and there is a 
       directed edge from one transaction to the other transaction if the first 
       one is waiting to lock a data item that is already locked by the second transaction. 
       When the second transaction releases the lock then the directed edge is dropped. 
       We have a state of deadlock iff there is a cycle in the wait for graph. 
       If there is a state of deadlock then we should abort some transaction 
       that is causing the deadlock. 
       Selecting transaction to abort is called as VICTIM SELECTION. 
   
   TIMEOUT: Another simple scheme to deal with deadlocks is to use timeouts. 
   This scheme assumes that if a transaction waits for a longer than a predefined 
   time then the transaction is deadlocked and it is aborted.

Starvation:
   It occurs when a transaction cannot proceed with the execution but other 
   transactions are proceeding normally. This happens when the waiting scheme 
   is unfair, giving priority to some transaction over other. 
   The solution is using fair waiting schemes such as FCFS. Another scheme 
   assigns priority to the transaction. This priority is relative to the wait 
   time of the transaction in the system. Thus, a waiting transaction will eventually 
   get the highest priority and will be executed.



Recovery In DBMS
    Recovery from failures usually means that the database is restored to 
    the most recent consistent state just before the time of failure.

Typical strategy for recovery may be summarized infomally as:
    1. If there is extensive damage to a wide portion of the db
    due to catastrophic failure, such as a disk crash, the recovery
    method restores a past copy of the db that was backed up in the archival storage
    and reconstructs the more currnt state by reapplying the operations of 
    commited transactions from the backed up log.
    
    2. When the db is not physically damaged but has become inconsistent. the 
    strategy is to reverse any changes made to the db by undoing some operations
    

Conceptually we can distinguish the two main techniques for recovery from 
non-catastrophic transaction failures:
    a. Deffered Update :
        The deferred update techniques do not physically update the database on 
        disk until after a transaction reaches its commit point; then 
        the updates are recorded in the database.
        
        During commit, the updates are first recorded persistently in the log
        and then written to the db. If a transaction fails before reaching 
        the commit point, it will not have changed the db, so UNDO is not needed.
        But REDO is required to update the db from the log. Hence, deffered
        update is also called NO-UNDO/REDO algorithm.
    
    b. Immediate Update:
        In the immediate update techniques, the database may be updated by some 
        operations of a transaction before the transaction reaches its commit 
        point. However, these operations are typically recorded in the log on 
        disk by force writing before they are applied to the database. 
        making recovery still possible.
        

Caching(Buffering) of Disk Blocks
    Basically the memory block that contains the data that the transaction wants to 
    use is first brought into the main memory. Each block is associated with a 
    dirty bit. When the block is first brought to the main memory its dirty
    bit is set to 0. When this block is modified then the bit is set to 1, indicating
    there were some modifications done to the block and it needs to be written in
    the disk.
    There is another bit pin-unpin bit, a page in the cache is pinned if it cannot 
    be written to the disk yet.
    
    
    When flushing the modified buffer back to disk. The first strategy, known as 
    in-place updating, writes the buffer back to its original location thus,
    over-writing the old values.
    
    The second strategy, known as shadowing, writes an updated buffer at a different
    location, so multiple versions of data-items can be maintained.


Write-Ahead Logging:
    When in-place updating is used, it is necessary to use a log for recovery. 
    In this case, the recovery mechanim must ensure that the BFIM of the item is 
    is recorded in the appropriate log entry and that the log entry is flushed to
    the disk before the BFIM is overwritten with the AFIM in the db on disk.
    This process is called Write-Ahead Logging.
    
    With the write-ahead logging approach, the log blocks that
    contain the associated log records for a particular data block update must 
    first be written to disk before the data block itself can be written back to disk.
    
    Steal/No-Steal
    If a cache page cannot be written to disk before the transaction commits, is 
    called no-steal approach. Otherwise if the protocal allows writing the updated
    buffer before the transaction commits, is called steal.
    
    Force/No-Force
    If all pages updpated by transaction are immediately written to disk when the
    transaction commits, is called force approach. Otherwise no-force.
    

    WAL-Protocol
    
    1. The BFIM cannot be overwritten by AFIM until all UNDO-type log records for 
    updating transactions have been force-written on disk.
    
    2. The commit operation of a transactio cannot be completed untill all 
    UNDO and REDO type log records have been force-written on disk


Checkpoints and Fuzzy Checkpointing:
    Another type of entry in the log is called a checkpoint. A checkpoint is written 
    in the log periodically at that point when the system writes out on the db on disk 
    all dbms buffers that have been modified. So all the transactions that have 
    COMMIT log do not have to WRITE again in case of a system crash.

    The recovery manager of a DBMS must decide the intervals to take a checkpoint.
    Taking a checkpoint consists of the following actions:
    1. suspend execution of transactions temporarily.
    2. force-write all main memory buffers to the disk
    3. Write CHECKPOINT record to the log
    4. Resume executing transactions

    Fuzzy checkpoint ka kucch nahi samjha bro

Transaction Rollback:
    If a transaction fails for whatever reason after updating the db then it is 
    necessary to rollback the transaction. If any data item values that have been
    changed by the transaction must be restored to their previous values.
    For this the UNDO-type log records are referred. 
    
    If a transaction T is rolled back then all the transactions that use the items
    modified by transaction T must also be rolled back and so on and so forth.
    This is called as Cascading Rollbacks. This occurs when the recovery protocol 
    ensures recoverable schedules but not strict or cascadeless schedules.

Shadow Paging:
    The database is maintained as a directory of n entries. These n enteries are
    basically a pointer to the page in memory. 
    The most updated directory is called as "current directory".
    When the transaction modifies content of a current_directory page. There is a 
    copy made of the current_directory called 'shadow_directory'. now the entries	
    in shadow directory also points to these same pages. The modified page is now 
    written in a new memory block and that locations address is used to update the
    pointers of the current_directory.
    So the previous data is never over written. To recover from a failure during 
    transaction, discard and free the modified pages, discard the current_directory, 
    and recover using t he shadow directory.
    
    Disadvantages:
    Complex storage management.
    If large directoory, overhead of copying for creating a shadow
    Garbage collection

ARIES Algorithm:
    ARIES uses Steal/No Force approach for writing, and it is based on three concepts:
    1. Write Ahead Logging
    2. Repeat history using REDO
    3. Logging changes during UNDO
        This will prevent ARIES from redoing completed undo operations if a failure
        occurs during recovery.  
    Three phases:
    1. Analysis Phase
    2. REDO Phase
    3. UNDO Phase
    remember LSN(Log Sequence Number) is used to determine the REDO start point.
    Among all the dirty pages the smallest LSN is selected for REDO.
    When the REDO phase is done we start with the UNDO operation for all th active 
    transactions. The log is maintained while undoing so thet if a crash occurs, We
    dont have to redo the undo operations.


